Anna Theodora Chancellor (born 27 April 1965) is an English actress. She has received nominations for BAFTA and Olivier Awards.


Background and early life
The daughter of John Paget Chancellor, eldest son of Sir Christopher Chancellor, and Mary Jolliffe, a daughter of Lord Hylton, Chancellor was brought up in Somerset and educated at St Mary's School, Shaftesbury, a Roman Catholic boarding school for girls in Dorset, but left at sixteen to live in London, later describing her early years there as "quite wild". In her early twenties, she became the partner of the poet Jock Scot (1952–2016), with whom she had a daughter whilst still studying at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. She separated from Scot a few years later. She got her first acting role on television playing Mercedes Page in Jupiter Moon, a BSkyB soap, then came a commercial for Boddingtons beer and a part in the film Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994), playing "Duckface" opposite Hugh Grant.

Chancellor is a niece of the journalist Alexander Chancellor, a great-granddaughter of Raymond Asquith (son of the Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith), a first cousin of the model Cecilia Chancellor and a second cousin of the actress Helena Bonham Carter. Chancellor herself has spoken derisively of her lineage, stating: "You've worked hard all your life to be an actress, or whatever you've done, and that is what's presented to you. Don't you think that's embarrassing? I don't enjoy being quoted as saying that's who I am, because I don't feel that is who I am."


Career
Chancellor had a prominent role in the series Kavanagh QC. She also played Caroline Bingley in the 1995 BBC adaptation of Pride and Prejudice, and Questular Rontok in The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (2005). The same year, she joined the cast of BBC One television drama series Spooks as Juliet Shaw. She has also appeared in The Vice, Karaoke, Cold Lazarus, The Dreamers, Tipping the Velvet  and Fortysomething, and had a leading role in the satirical black comedy Suburban Shootout. In 2011, she took a supporting role in the BBC thriller serial The Hour, for which she was nominated for the British Academy Television Award for Best Supporting Actress.In 1997, she received a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role nomination for her performance in Stanley and in 2013 an Olivier Award for Best Actress nomination for her part in Private Lives.


Charity
She is a patron of the London children's charity Scene & Heard.


Filmography


Theatre
Boston Marriage, Donmar Warehouse – March–April 2001; Donmar in the West End – November 2001 – February 2002
Mammals at the Oxford Playhouse and touring  – Lorna, January 2006
Never So Good, National Theatre – summer 2008
The Observer, National Theatre – spring 2009
The Last of the Duchess, Hampstead Theatre – October–November 2011
Private Lives (playing Amanda), Chichester Festival Theatre, September 2012, and the Gielgud Theatre, London (July–September 2013)
The Wolf From the Door, Royal Court Theatre, September–November 2014
The Seagull by Anton Chekhov at National Theatre – summer 2016


Audiobooks
Chancellor has played the role of Ann Smiley in a BBC dramatisation of the John le Carre novels The Honourable Schoolboy and Smiley's People.


Ancestry


References


External links
Anna Chancellor on IMDb 
Anna Chancellor at the bbc.co.uk official Spooks website
The Anna Chancellor Page
Anna Chancellor sponsored video interview at The Huffington Post