Little Women is an upcoming American coming-of-age period drama film written and directed by Greta Gerwig. It is the eighth feature film adaptation of the 1868 novel of the same name by Louisa May Alcott. The film stars Meryl Streep, Saoirse Ronan, Emma Watson, Timothée Chalamet, Florence Pugh, Eliza Scanlen, Laura Dern, James Norton, Louis Garrel, Bob Odenkirk, Chris Cooper and Abby Quinn. It is scheduled to be theatrically released in the United States on December 25, 2019 by Sony Pictures Releasing.


Premise
Little Women explores the lives of sisters in 1860s Massachusetts. According to one of its producers, the new adaptation focuses more on the March sisters' young adult lives, particularly after Meg, Jo, and Amy leave their family home. The film jumps back and forth in time and focuses more on themes rather than narrative.


Cast
Meryl Streep as Aunt March
Saoirse Ronan as Jo March
Timothée Chalamet as Theodore "Laurie" Laurence
Florence Pugh as Amy March
Eliza Scanlen as Beth March
James Norton as John Brooke
Laura Dern as Marmee March
Emma Watson as Meg March
Louis Garrel as Friedrich Bhaer
Bob Odenkirk as Mr. March
Chris Cooper
Abby Quinn as Annie
Tracy Letts


Production


Development
A new film adaptation of Little Women was announced by Sony Pictures in October 2013. In March 2015, Amy Pascal began developing the new adaptation, with Sarah Polley hired to write the script and potentially direct.In August 2016, Greta Gerwig was hired to re-write the draft initially written by Polley. In June 2018, in light of her recent success with Lady Bird, Gerwig was brought on as director.


Casting
In June 2018, it was announced that Meryl Streep, Emma Stone, Saoirse Ronan, Timothée Chalamet and Florence Pugh had been cast for the film. In July 2018, Eliza Scanlen joined the cast. In August 2018, James Norton and Laura Dern joined the cast. Then in the same month, Emma Watson was cast to replace Stone who dropped out due to her commitments to the press tour for The Favourite. In September 2018, Louis Garrel, Bob Odenkirk and Chris Cooper joined the cast. In October 2018, New Regency Pictures was announced as an additional financier on the film, and Abby Quinn joined the cast.


Filming
Principal photography began on October 5, 2018, in Boston, Massachusetts. Additional filming locations included Harvard and Concord, Massachusetts. The Arnold Arboretum was used as a location to shoot a scene set in a 19th-century Paris park. Filming wrapped on December 15, 2018.


Music
On April 8, 2019, it was announced that Alexandre Desplat had been hired to compose the film's score.


Release
The film is scheduled to be theatrically released in the United States on December 25, 2019 by Sony Pictures Releasing.


Marketing
On December 13, 2018, Emma Watson posted an on-set photo on social media showing her along with writer-director Greta Gerwig and co-stars Saoirse Ronan, Florence Pugh, Eliza Scanlen and Timothée Chalamet. Six days later, Watson posted another on-set photo showing her along with Gerwig and co-star Laura Dern. On June 19, 2019, Vanity Fair released the first stills from the film.


References


External links
Little Women on IMDb