Lumiere (foaled 10 March 2013) is a British Thoroughbred racehorse. She was one of the best British two-year-olds of 2015 when she won the Cheveley Park Stakes.


Background
Lumiere is a grey filly bred in England by Sheikh Mohammed's Darley Stud. She was from the seventh crop of foals sired by Shamardal whose wins included the Dewhurst Stakes, Poule d'Essai des Poulains, Prix du Jockey Club and St. James's Palace Stakes. His other offspring have included Able Friend, Mukhadram, Lope de Vega and Casamento. Lumiere's dam Screen Star won on her only racecourse appearance, a contest for two-year-old at Redcar Racecourse in 2007. She was a great-granddaughter of Outstandingly the American Champion Two-Year-Old Filly of 1984.During her racing career, the filly has been owned by Sheikh Mohammed's son Hamdan bin Mohammed Al Maktoum and is trained by Mark Johnston at Middleham in North Yorkshire. She has been ridden in all of her races by William Buick.


Racing career


2015: two-year-old season
Lumiere made her racecourse debut in a maiden race over six furlongs at Newmarket Racecourse on 9 July and started the 6/5 favourite against seven opponents. She led from the start, accelerated away from the field approaching the final furlong and won impressively by six lengths from Sharja Queen. The filly was then moved up sharply in class for the Group Two Lowther Stakes at York Racecourse on 20 August and started the 9/4 favourite ahead of the Princess Margaret Stakes winner Besharah. She took the lead soon after the start but was overtaken by Besharah inside the final furlong and was beaten two and a quarter lengths into second place.
On her third and final appearance as a juvenile, Lumiere was one of eight fillies to contest the Group One Cheveley Park Stakes over six furlongs at Newmarket on 26 September and started the 100/30 third choice in the betting behind Besharah and the Duchess of Cambridge Stakes winner Illuminate. A two-horse Irish challenge comprised Alice Springs (third to Minding in the Moyglare Stud Stakes) and the Curragh Stakes winner Bear Cheek. Lumiere took the lead from the start and opened up a clear advantage at half way. She was strongly challenged in the closing stages but stayed on to win by half a length, a head and three quarters of a length from Illuminate, Besharah and Alice Springs. After the race Johnston said "We always thought there was no shortage of stamina but we also know she's very fast and has a tremendous cruising speed. I'm very, very hopeful she can stay a mile".


2016: three-year-old season
Lumiere began her second season in the 1000 Guineas at Newmarket on 1 May and started the second favourite in a sixteen-runner field. After starting strongly and disputing the early lead she dropped away quickly in the last three furlongs and finished last behind Minding.


Pedigree


References


External links
Career 1-2-3 Colour Chart – Lumiere